---
title: EU AI Act enters into force
tags:
  - ai
links:
  - https://www.europarl.europa.eu/topics/en/article/20230601STO93804/eu-ai-act-first-regulation-on-artificial-intelligence
---
- **EU AI Act enters into force**:
  - The Parliament adopted the Artificial Intelligence Act in March 2024 and the Council followed with its approval in May 2024. It will be fully applicable 24 months after entry into force, but some parts will be applicable sooner:
    - The ban of AI systems posing unacceptable risks will apply six months after the entry into force;
    - Codes of practice will apply nine months after entry into force;
    - Rules on general-purpose AI systems that need to comply with transparency requirements will apply 12 months after the entry into force;
    - High-risk systems will have more time to comply with the requirements as the obligations concerning them will become applicable 36 months after the entry into force.
  - The new rules establish obligations for providers and users depending on the level of risk from artificial intelligence. While many AI systems pose minimal risk, they need to be assessed.
    - Unacceptable risk AI systems are systems considered a threat to people and will be banned.
    - AI systems that negatively affect safety or fundamental rights will be considered high risk. All high-risk AI systems will be assessed before being put on the market and also throughout their lifecycle.
    - Generative AI, like ChatGPT, will not be classified as high-risk, but will have to comply with transparency requirements and EU copyright law:
      - Disclosing that the content was generated by AI
      - Designing the model to prevent it from generating illegal content
      - Publishing summaries of copyrighted data used for training.