---
title: CJEU AG on Automated Decision Making and disclosure of decision mechanism
tags:
  - eu
  - cjeu
  - automated_decisions
  - rights
  - change
links:
  - https://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=290022&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=2084344
date: 2024-09-30
---
- **CJEU AG on Automated Decision Making and disclosure of decision mechanism (complexity, trade secrets)**:
  - A mobile telephone operator refused to extend a contract with the customer on the ground that she did not have sufficient financial creditworthiness. CK’s allegedly insufficient creditworthiness was substantiated by an automated credit assessment.  D & B (the operator) challenged the decision of the Austrian data protection authority requiring it to disclose the information requested by CK before the Bundesverwaltungsgericht (Federal Administrative Court, Austria).
  - The crux of the matter is:
    - What constitutes "meaningful information" under Article 15(1)(h) of the GDPR in profiling cases?
    - Must this include details on the algorithm, input data, and parameters used in automated decision-making?
    - How can transparency be balanced with the protection of trade secrets and third-party data?
    - Does Article 15(4) of the GDPR limit access rights if trade secrets are involved?
    - Are national data protection laws (like Austria’s DSG) compatible with the GDPR when limiting access to trade secrets?
  - AG's notable opinions:
    - [34-35] In his Opinion delivered in the case which gave rise to the judgment in SCHUFA Holding and Others  (Scoring), (12) Advocate General Pikamäe expressed a view on the main aspects of those questions. He considered that Article 15(1)(h) of the GDPR, read in conjunction with recital 63 of that regulation, must be interpreted as ‘also covering, in principle, the calculation method used by a credit information agency to establish a score, provided there are no conflicting interests that are worthy of protection’. ... In Advocate General Pikamäe’s view, it follows that ‘while protection of trade secrets or intellectual property in principle constitutes a legitimate reason for a credit information agency to refuse to disclose the algorithm used to calculate the score for the data subject, it cannot under any circumstances justify an absolute refusal to provide information’. 
    - [37-38] Advocate General Pikamäe therefore concluded that ‘the obligation to provide “meaningful information about the logic involved” must be understood to include sufficiently detailed explanations of the method used to calculate the score and the reasons for a certain result. In general, the controller should provide the data subject with general information, notably on factors taken into account for the decision-making process and on their respective weight on an aggregate level, which is also useful for him or her to challenge any “decision” within the meaning of Article 22(1) of the GDPR.’ ... I agree, in essence, with the interpretation proposed by Advocate General Pikamäe.
    - [64] The data subject’s knowledge of that context must enable him or her, through knowledge of the essential elements of the method and the criteria used, to understand the result reached by the automated decision. In short, the process, which is technical in nature, that led to that decision must be made intelligible. Only in that way will the data subject be able to exercise his or her rights under the GDPR, including the right to express his or her point of view on an automated decision and the right to challenge it. The concept of ‘meaningful information about the logic involved’ in automated decision-making must therefore be understood functionally.  
    - [71] ... person can obtain information that is concise, easily accessible and easy to understand, and formulated in clear and plain language on the method and criteria used for that decision. In the second place, that information must be sufficiently complete and contextualised to enable that person to verify its accuracy and whether there is an objectively verifiable consistency and causal link between, on the one hand, the method and criteria used and, on the other, the result arrived at by the automated decision.
    - !!! [72] In the light of the foregoing, I do not consider that Article 15(1)(h) of the GDPR must be interpreted as imposing on the controller an obligation to disclose to the data subject information which, by reason of its technical nature, is so complex that it cannot be understood by persons who do not have particular technical expertise. (45) In my view, algorithms used in automated decision-making constitute such information.
    - !!! [74] ‘the controller should find simple ways to tell the data subject about the rationale behind, or the criteria relied on in reaching the decision. The GDPR requires the controller to provide meaningful information about the logic involved, not necessarily a complex explanation of the algorithms used or disclosure of the full algorithm … The information provided should, however, be sufficiently comprehensive for the data subject to understand the reasons for the decision.’ (47) Thus, ‘the controller should provide the data subject with general information (notably, on factors taken into account for the decision-making process, and on their respective “weight” on an aggregate level) which is also useful for him or her to challenge the decision’. 
    - !!! [94] I consider that ... where the information which must be provided to the data subject under the right of access guaranteed by the first of those provisions is likely to result in an infringement of the rights and freedoms of others, in particular because it contains personal data of third parties protected by the GDPR or a trade secret, within the meaning of Article 2(1)(1) of Directive 2016/943, that information must be disclosed to the competent supervisory authority or court so that the latter can weigh up, in full knowledge of the facts and in accordance with the principle of proportionality and the confidentiality of that information, the interests involved and determine the extent of the right of access that must be granted to that person.
  - Summary:
    -  that information must enable the data subject to exercise the rights ... It must therefore be concise, easily accessible and easy to understand, and formulated in clear and plain language. In addition, the information must be sufficiently complete and contextualised to enable that person to verify its accuracy and whether there is an objectively verifiable consistency and causal link between, on the one hand, the method and criteria used and, on the other hand, the result arrived at by the automated decision at issue;
    -  the controller is not required to disclose to the data subject information which, by reason of its technical nature, is so complex that it cannot be understood by persons who do not have particular technical expertise, which is such as to preclude disclosure of the algorithms used in automated decision-making;
    -  where the information to be provided to the data subject under the right of access ... is likely to result in an infringement of the rights and freedoms of others, in particular because it contains personal data of third parties protected by that regulation or a trade secret ... that information must be disclosed to the competent supervisory authority or court so that the latter can weigh up, in full knowledge of the facts and in accordance with the principle of proportionality and the confidentiality of that information, the interests involved and determine the extent of the right of access that must be granted to that person.
