---
title: EDPB's new Legitimate Interest Guidelines
tags:
  - legitimate_interest
  - edpb
  - rights
  - change
links:
  - https://www.edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/documents/public-consultations/2024/guidelines-12024-processing-personal-data-based_en
---
Interesting points:
- 3 cumulative conditions for LI (para 6):
	- First, the pursuit of a legitimate interest by the controller or by a third party;
	- Second, the need to process personal data for the purposes of the legitimate interest(s) pursued (i.e., the processing of personal data must be “necessary” for those purposes); and
	- Third, the interests or fundamental freedoms and rights of the concerned data subjects do not take precedence over the legitimate interest(s) of the controller or of a third party.
- Legitimate nature of the interest:
	- para 14: concept of “interest” is closely related to, but distinct from, the concept of “purpose” mentioned, for instance, in Article 5(1)(b) GDPR. A “purpose” is the specific reason why the data are processed: the aim or intention of the data processing. An “interest”, on the other hand, is the broader stake or benefit that a controller or third party may have in engaging in a specific processing activity. For example, a controller may have an interest in promoting its products, whereas this interest may be advanced by processing personal data for direct marketing purposes.
	- para 17: An interest may be regarded as “legitimate” if the following cumulative criteria are met:
		- The interest is lawful, i.e., not contrary to EU or Member State law.27 While the concept of “legitimate interest” within the meaning of Article 6(1)(f) GDPR is not limited to interests enshrined in and determined by law, it requires that the alleged legitimate interest be lawful. 
		- The interest is clearly and precisely articulated. The perimeter of the legitimate interest pursued must be clearly identified in order to ensure that it will be properly balanced against the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject. 
		- The interest is real and present, and not speculative. As clarified by the CJEU, the legitimate interest must be present and effective at the date of the data processing and must not be hypothetical at that date.
	- para 20: personal data may be processed in the interest of a third party.
- Necessity of processing:
	- para 29: Assessing what is “necessary” involves ascertaining whether in practice the legitimate data processing interests pursued cannot reasonably be achieved just as effectively by other means less restrictive of the fundamental rights and freedoms of data subjects.
- Balancing:
	- para 32: controller must identify and describe: 
		- i) The data subjects’ interests, fundamental rights and freedoms. 
			- para 37: fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subjects include the right to data protection and privacy, but also other fundamental rights and freedoms, such as the right to liberty and security, freedom of expression and information, freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of assembly and association, prohibition of discrimination, the right of property, or the right to physical and mental integrity, which may be affected by the processing, either directly or indirectly
		- ii) The impact of the processing on data subjects, including 
			- a. The nature of the data to be processed,
				- para 40: e.g. special categories; ... types of data that data subjects generally consider to be more private (e.g., financial data, location data, etc.), or rather of a more public nature (e.g., data concerning one’s professional role).
			- b. The context of the processing, and 
				- para 43: scale of the processing and the amount of personal data to be processed (in terms of overall volume of data, volume of data per data subject, and the number of data subjects affected),51 - the status of the controller, including vis-à-vis the data subject (e.g., an employer-employee relationship will likely require an assessment that is different from the one concerning a service provider-customer relationship), - whether or not the personal data to be processed are combined with other data sets, - the degree of accessibility and/or publicity of the data to be processed,52 and - the status of the data subject (e.g., vulnerable individuals).
			- c. Any further consequences of the processing. 
				- para 45: - Potential future decisions or actions by third parties that may be based on the personal data to be processed by the controller, - The possible production of legal effects concerning the data subject, - Exclusion of or discrimination against individuals, - Defamation, or more broadly, situations where there is a risk of damaging the reputation, negotiating power or autonomy of the data subject, - Financial losses which may be incurred by the data subject, - Exclusion from a service for which there is no real alternative, and - Risks to freedom, safety, physical and mental integrity or life of natural persons.
		- iii) The reasonable expectations of the data subject. 
			- para 54: Characteristics of the relationship
			- Characteristics of the “average” data subjects
		- iv) The final balancing of opposing rights and interests, including the possibility of further mitigating measures.
			- para 57: mitigating measures should not be confused with the measures that the controller is legally required to adopt anyway to ensure compliance with the GDPR, irrespective of whether the processing is based on Article 6(1)(f) GDPR. For that reason, mitigating measures can, for instance, not consist of measures meant to ensure compliance with the controllers’ information obligations, security obligations, obligations to comply with the principle of data minimisation, or the fulfilment of data subject rights under the GDPR, and must go beyond what is already necessary to comply with these legal obligations under the GDPR. For example, introducing additional safeguards above and beyond the safeguards required under the GDPR may be seen as a mitigating measure (e.g., allowing the data subject to exercise the right to erasure even when the specific grounds listed in Article 17(1) GDPR do not apply, allowing the data subject to exercise the right to object without any of the limitations in Article 21 GDPR, allowing the data subject to exercise the right to data portability even when the processing is based on Article 6(1)(f), etc.)
- Right to object #rights 
	- para 71: data subject has the right to object, on grounds relating to his or her particular situation ... the fact that the data subject has not elaborated much on their “particular situation” in their objection is not per se sufficient to dismiss the objection. If the controller has doubts as to the “particular situation” of the data subject, it may ask the data subject to further specify the request.
	- para 72: controller shall no longer process the personal data unless there are overriding compelling legitimate grounds which take precedence over the interests and rights and freedoms of that person, which it is for the controller to demonstrate.
	- para 73: The notion of “compelling legitimate grounds” is not defined in the GDPR. However, it is clear from the wording of Article 21 GDPR that the assessment to be made by the controller to demonstrate that there are legitimate grounds that take precedence over the interests and rights and freedoms of the data subject is different from the balancing exercise to be made under Article 6(1)(f) GDPR. ... it is not sufficient for the controller to just demonstrate that its earlier legitimate interest assessment regarding that processing was correct. The balancing test to be made under Article 21(1) GDPR is to be carried out in view of the particular situation of the data subject and requires the legitimate grounds invoked by the controller to be compelling, implying a higher threshold for overriding data subject objections.85 In other words, **not all conceivable legitimate interests** that may justify processing under Article 6(1)(f) GDPR are relevant in this context. Only **interests that can be recognised as “compelling” may be balanced** against the rights, freedoms and interests of the data subject to assess whether there are grounds for processing that take precedence, despite the objection of the data subject.86 In essence, the grounds invoked **should be essential to the controller** (or to the third party in whose legitimate interest the data are being processed) to be considered compelling.
- Right to erasure #rights 
	- Para 77: The right to erasure is often closely linked, from a conceptual and practical perspective, to the right to object, in particular when the processing is based on Article 6(1)(f) GDPR. As a result, it might happen that the data subject’s request is not completely clear about whether the data subject wishes to obtain the erasure of their personal data or objects to the relevant processing. In this respect, it should be noted that the GDPR does not introduce any formal requirements for the exercise of data subject rights. #change 
	- para 78: if an objection under Article 21(1) GDPR is granted, a related erasure request under Article 17(1)(c) GDPR should also be granted.
- Special cases:
	- Children's data
		- para 94: While this does not mean that there will never be a situation in which the interests of the child can be overridden, it does mean that the interests of children as data subjects should have high priority and will very often outweigh the interests of the controller or third parties.
		- para 95: Article 6(1)(f) GDPR may be invoked as a legal basis by a controller where the legitimate interests pursued coincide with the interests of the child. However, when there is a conflict between a controller’s legitimate interests (including regarding processing of personal data for commercial purposes)119 and the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of a child, the interests or fundamental rights and freedoms of the child should in general prevail.
	- Fraud prevention
		- para 100: data processing in the field of fraud prevention may find its legal basis in Article 6(1)(f) GDPR
		- para 104: processing of personal data for the legitimate interest of fraud prevention does not apply without conditions and limitations, in particular because this kind of processing may have a significant impact on data subjects. For example, Recital 47 makes clear that the processing of personal data must be “strictly necessary for the purposes of preventing fraud”, which must be examined in conjunction with the “data minimisation”
	-  Internal administrative purposes within a group of undertakings
		- para 125: To improve services within their corporate group, the headquarters of such group decide to make statistics on how long clients of their subsidiaries have actually been clients, if they have raised complaints about a subsidiary during this period, etc. This is to enable the group to assess if organisational changes need to be made to better retain clients in the future. To be able to do so, certain information about the clients is shared by the subsidiaries with the group’s headquarters. As this processing by the company’s headquarters is not directly linked to the contractual relationship with the clients, such processing of personal data may be based – depending on the concrete circumstances and subject to compliance with other provisions of the GDPR – on Article 6(1)(f) GDPR.