---
title: German DPA issues clarifications on deceptive designs
tags:
  - dark_pattern
links:
  - https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/faq-zu-deceptive-design-patterns/
  - https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Continuous-prompting.jpg
  - https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Bild_Overloading-%E2%80%93-Privacy-Maze.jpg
  - https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Deceptive-Snugness.jpg
  - https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Emotional-Steering.jpg
  - https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Hidden-in-Plain-Sight.jpg
  - https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Bild_Left-in-the-Dark-–-Conflicting-Information.jpg
---
Specific scenarios covered:
- **Overloading**: Users are confronted with a large amount of inquiries, information, options and / or options, which entices them to disclose more data or inadvertently allow data processing contrary to their expectations. Examples:
	- **Continuous prompting**: Users are repeatedly asked to provide further data or to agree to a (further) processing purpose. This leads users to disclose more data than required or to consent to further use of their data than originally intended because they are tired of having to reject the requests for this every time the platform is used. https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Continuous-prompting.jpg
	- **Privacy maze**: It is particularly difficult for users to access information or data protection settings by distributing them behind many layers and on different pages, through which users have to work through without a complete overview. There is no uniform approach to how many steps are still viable for users of social media platforms to change data protection settings. At the same time, a higher number of steps can lead to that users do not complete changes or overlook important steps. https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Bild_Overloading-%E2%80%93-Privacy-Maze.jpg
	- **Too many options:** When users are faced with too many pages/tabs to review and navigate to manage their privacy settings, it becomes overwhelming. Too many options for users to choose from can lead to them not being able to make a choice, or they may overlook settings and ultimately give up, thus not setting their privacy preferences correctly.
- **Skipping**: In this case, the user interface is designed in such a way that users do not have to worry about data protection aspects or forget them.
	- **Deceptive Snugness:** In this case, the most data-invasive settings are already selected in advance. After the registration process, users are no longer offered the option to change their settings (directly) and/or require several steps. https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Deceptive-Snugness.jpg
	- **Look over there:** Here, data protection measures and/or information compete with other (not necessarily data protection) elements. If users choose the other, distracting option, they may forget the measure they were actually planning or the information they were looking for.
- **Stirring**: Stirring involves influencing users’ decisions by appealing to their emotions or using visual stimuli.
	- **Emotional steering:** This deceptive design pattern uses word choice or visual elements (such as style, colors, images, etc.) to make users feel good, safe, or rewarded, or tense, guilty, or punished. The effects of such practices can be amplified by basing them on data collected by the platform. https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Emotional-Steering.jpg
	- **Hidden in Plain Sight:** Users are shown required information or privacy settings in a way that makes them easy to miss, for example by using a smaller font or a color that does not stand out enough from the background. _Hidden in Plain Sight_ leads users to choose more disadvantageous and/or invasive options because it becomes more strenuous and time-consuming to find the information and privacy options in question._ https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Hidden-in-Plain-Sight.jpg
- **Obstructing**: Users are discouraged or prevented from obtaining information or managing their data by making it difficult or impossible to do so.
	- **Dead end:** This is the case when information or data protection settings are not provided. On the one hand, information may not be listed anywhere from the outset. On the other hand, data protection measures or options that were initially available may no longer be found later on in the course of use. Last but not least, it can also happen that providers provide links that do not work for no apparent reason.
	- **Longer than necessary:** ​​Furthermore, _obstructing_ in the form of _longer than necessary_ can occur if activating data protection controls or withdrawing consent requires more steps than activating less invasive settings or initially granting consent.
	- **Misleading action:** There is a mismatch between information and available action that leads users to do something they did not intend to do. The difference between what users expect and what they get makes it likely that they will be deterred from continuing.
- **Fickle**: Fickle means that the design of the user interface is inconsistent and unclear, making it difficult for users to navigate the different data protection tools and understand the purpose of the processing.
	- **Lacking Hierarchy:** Data protection information is presented multiple times in many different ways without any internal system or hierarchy being apparent. 
	- **Decontextualising:** The privacy information or controls are located on a page that does not fit the context.
	- **Inconsistent interface:** A user interface is not consistent across different contexts or with regard to user expectations. These differences can lead to users not being able to find the settings or information they want, or to users interacting with a certain element out of habit. 
	- **Language discontinuity:** In contrast to the service itself, the information is not provided in the official language of the country in which the user lives. 
- **Left in the Dark**:  The user interface is designed in such a way that information or privacy controls are hidden or that users are left unclear about how their data is processed or what kind of control they can exercise by exercising their rights over data processing.
	- Left in the Dark can appear in the form of **conflicting information**.
	- Furthermore, ambiguous wording or information can be used. https://www.baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/Bild_Left-in-the-Dark-–-Conflicting-Information.jpg

Best practices:
1. **Shortcuts** : Make links to information, actions, or settings that are of practical use to users in managing their data and privacy settings available whenever users are confronted with the corresponding information or experience (e.g. links that lead to the relevant parts of the privacy policy).
2. **Bulk options** : Group settings that relate to the same processing purpose together in such a way that users can change them more easily, but at the same time have the option to make more granular changes. If you present bulk options, they should not contain any unexpected or unrelated elements. If consent is required for processing, the bulk options must comply with the EDPB Guidelines on consent (in particular paras. 42-44).
3. **Contact information:** Make sure that your contact details for data protection questions are clearly listed in the privacy policy. They should be in the part of the statement where users expect them, such as the section on the identity of the controller, the rights of users or how to contact them.
4. **Accessibility of the supervisory authority** : Identify the exact supervisory authority and a link to its website or to the section of the website relating to how to lodge a complaint with the authority in a section where users expect it, for example in the section on users' rights.
5. **Overview of the privacy policy:** Precede the privacy policy with an overview in the form of a (fold-out) table of contents with headings and subheadings that show the different passages/paragraphs of the privacy policy.
6. **Visibility and comparison of changes:** If you make changes to the privacy policy, you should highlight them. You should also make previous versions of the policy available with the respective publication date.
7. **Consistent wording:** The choice of words on the website and the privacy policy should be consistent.
8. **Providing definitions:** Unusual or technical terms should be defined in simple language that allows users to understand the information provided to them. This can be done directly in the text or via a glossary.
9. **Highlighting data protection elements:** Make data protection elements or measures that are located in a user interface that is not directly dedicated to the topic visually conspicuous. Example: If users post a public message on the platform, the location assignment setting should be directly available to them and clearly visible.
10. **Privacy onboarding** : Include privacy considerations as part of the user experience on the platform right after they set up an account, so that users can easily find out and set their preferences right from the start, for example by asking them to set their privacy preferences right after they share their first post or add their first friend.
11. **Use of examples:** In addition to the mandatory information that clearly and unambiguously explains the purpose of the processing, provide examples of specific data processing operations to make them more tangible for users.
12. **Sticky navigation** : Ensure that users who navigate through pages that deal with data protection issues are constantly shown a table of contents that allows them to orient themselves and navigate through the content quickly and easily using anchor links.
13. **Back to top:** Use back to top buttons at the bottom of the page or window to make navigation easier.
14. **Notifications:** Use notifications to raise users' awareness of specific aspects, changes or risks related to the processing of personal data (e.g. in case of a data breach). Notifications can be implemented in different ways, e.g. through messages in the inbox, pop-in windows, fixed banners at the top of the website, etc.
15. **Explain consequences:** Explain consequences: Inform users who want to activate or deactivate a privacy setting and give or withdraw their consent in a neutral way about what this means for them.
16. **Cross-device consistency:** If your social media platform is accessible via different devices (e.g. computers, smartphones, etc.), settings and information across the different versions must be integrated in the same places, using the same path and the same interface elements (menus, icons, etc.).
17. **Data protection directory:** Provide users with an easily accessible page from which all data protection-related measures (e.g. settings) and information can be accessed to ensure easy orientation through the different sections of the menu. This page could, for example, be integrated into the main navigation menu of the social media providers in the user account or via the privacy policy.
18. **Contextual information** : In addition to the detailed privacy policy, provide users with brief, specific information about the processing of their data at appropriate times.
19. **Self-explanatory URL:** For pages related to privacy settings or information, use an Internet address that clearly reflects the content.  
    For example, a page containing centralized privacy settings could have a URL like this:  
    [social-network.com]/data-settings
20. **Form for exercising data subject rights:** Provide users with a form for exercising data subject rights. This helps them understand their rights and makes it easier to exercise them.