---
title: Commission fines Meta €797.72 million over abusive practices benefitting Facebook Marketplace
tags:
  - dark_pattern
links:
  - https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_24_5801
---
# Summary

The European Commission has fined Meta €797.72 million for violating EU antitrust regulations. Meta was found to have abused its dominant positions in the markets for personal social network services and online display advertising. The company tied its online classified ads service, Facebook Marketplace, to its social network, Facebook, and imposed unfair trading conditions on other online classified ads service providers. This gave Facebook Marketplace an unfair advantage that competitors could not match. The Commission has ordered Meta to cease these practices.

# Details

- **Meta's Infringement:** Meta, the parent company of Facebook, was found to be dominant in the market for personal social networks within the European Economic Area (EEA) and in national markets for online display advertising on social media.
- **Abuse of Dominance:** The European Commission determined that Meta abused its dominant positions in two ways:
    - **Tying Facebook Marketplace to Facebook:** By automatically giving all Facebook users access to Facebook Marketplace, Meta provided the service with a substantial distribution advantage, which competitors could not match. This was considered a violation of Article 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
    - **Imposing unfair trading conditions:** Meta imposed unfair trading conditions on other online classified ads service providers who advertised on its platforms, particularly Facebook and Instagram. Meta used data generated by these advertisers for the benefit of Facebook Marketplace.
- **Fine:** The Commission imposed a fine of €797.72 million on Meta. The fine was determined based on the duration and gravity of the infringement, the turnover of Facebook Marketplace related to the infringements, and Meta's overall turnover to ensure sufficient deterrence.
- **Remedial Action:** Meta is required to end the identified practices and refrain from repeating the infringement or adopting similar practices in the future.
- **Background:** The Commission initiated formal proceedings into Meta's conduct in June 2021, sent a Statement of Objections in December 2022, and received Meta's response in June 2023.
- **Legal Framework:** Article 102 of the TFEU and Article 54 of the EEA Agreement prohibit the abuse of a dominant position. Dominant companies have a special responsibility to not restrict competition.
- **Use of Fines:** Fines collected from companies found in breach of EU antitrust rules are added to the general EU budget, reducing the financial burden on taxpayers.